==============
 GeneNetTools
==============

.. note::

   This documentation is still a work in progress.

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/docker/pulls/venustiano/cds
   :alt: Docker Pulls

The `GeneNetTools` container implements the statistical techniques
developed in :cite:t:`2022:bernal`. These implementations allow not
only to ``reproduce`` some of the results in the paper but also
``reuse`` the functions with your own data ``without the need for
programming skills``. It is assumed that you have `Docker
<https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/>`_ installed.


Reproducible results
====================

From the time being, two figures can be reproduced with the
`GeneNetTools` container ``Figure 2 (b)`` and ``Figure 3``.

Figure 2 (b). Partial correlations plot
---------------------------------------

#. Save the following JSON object in an ``shrunk.json`` file

   .. code-block:: json
		   
      {
          "filename":"https://raw.githubusercontent.com/V-Bernal/GeneNetTools/venus/feature/container/GeneNetTools/tests/testthat/data/ecoli.csv",
	  "verbose": true,
	  "cutoff": 0.01
      }

   or download the file running the command::

     wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/V-Bernal/GeneNetTools/venus/feature/container/GeneNetTools/tests/testthat/params/shrunk.json

#. Run the command
   
   ::

      docker run --rm -v "$PWD":/app/data venustiano/cds:genenettools-0.1.0 c_pcor_shrunk shrunk.json

   Results

   ::
   
      Opening  parameters file: shrunk.json
      Reading all columns
      Number of samples =  9 
      Number of variables =  102 
      degrees of freedom k = 828.949258958985

   and the plot in ``Rplots.pdf``

   .. figure:: ../../../_static/floretplot.png-1.png
	:width: 500
	:alt: florest plot

	Escherichia coli. Forest plot of partial correlations. The 15
	strongest edges are displayed with their 95% confidence
	intervals. The vertical lines show the 0.1 and 0.3 thresholds
	for weak and mild correlations (Cohen, 1988).

	
Figure 3. Differential network analysis
---------------------------------------

#. Save the following JSON object in an ``zscore.json`` file

   .. code-block:: json
		
      {
	"filename": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/V-Bernal/GeneNetTools/venus/feature/container/GeneNetTools/tests/testthat/data/DBA_2J.csv",
	"filename2": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/V-Bernal/GeneNetTools/venus/feature/container/GeneNetTools/tests/testthat/data/C57BL_6J.csv",
	"verbose": true,
	"cutoff": 0.01
      }

   or download the json file running the command::

     wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/V-Bernal/GeneNetTools/venus/feature/container/GeneNetTools/tests/testthat/params/zscore.json

#. Run the command
      
   ::

      docker run --rm -v "$PWD":/app/data venustiano/cds:genenettools-0.1.0 c_zscore_shrunk zscore.json

   Results

   ::

      Opening  parameters file: zscore.json 
      Reading all columns
      Reading all columns
      Number of samples =  11 
      Number of variables =  221 
      degrees of freedom k = 465.630975024994
      Number of samples =  10 
      Number of variables =  221 
      degrees of freedom k = 284.915155078846
   
   .. figure:: ../../../_static/scatter-1.png
      :width: 500
      :alt: scatter plot


Additional example
========================

Network for Escherichia coli microarray data :cite:t:`10.1093/bioinformatics/btz357`.


::

   docker run --rm -v "$PWD":/app/data venustiano/cds:genenettools-0.1.0 c_pval_pcor_shrunk shrunk.json

.. figure:: ../../../_static/network.png-1.png
  :width: 500
  :alt: network

  Figure S5-a. GGM structure for Escherichia coli. The figure displays the
  GGM structure for Escherichia coli for the connected genes with
  Shrunk MLE at ùõº = 0.01. 
	    
Reusing the methods
===================

When using the methods with your own data, a couple of constraint are
that the variables/columns should be numeric and make sure that ``no
rownames`` are in the data file. The above examples retrieve the data
is retrieved from internet but it can be stored in the same folder as
the JSON file.

Basic commands
==============
	    
Running the container::

  docker run --rm venustiano/cds:genenettools-0.1.0

will display the available functions in the container::

  Index:

  c_pcor_shrunk           Partial correlation shrunk
  c_pval_pcor_shrunk      pval_pcor_shrunk
  c_zscore_shrunk         c_zscore_shrunk
  compare.GGM             compare.GGM

The `c_` prefix in the function name stands for containerized and
receives a `JSON <https://www.json.org/json-en.html>`_ file name as a
parameter. This file must contain information such as the data file,
the parameters of the function and the output formats. Finally, the
container will stop running and the `--rm` flag will remove it.

Function documentation
----------------------

The ``help`` flag.

::
   
   docker run --rm venustiano/cds:genenettools-0.1.0 c_pcor_shrunk help

::

   c_pcor_shrunk          package:GeneNetTools           R Documentation

   Partial correlation shrunk

   Description:

     This function computes confidence intervals for the partial
     correlation with shrinkage.

   Usage:

     c_pcor_shrunk(lparams)
     
   Arguments:

   lparams: a list of parameters created using a JSON file. This file should
            contain the following name/value pairs.

            "filename": <string, required>

            "variables": <array, strings representing column names>

            "cutoff": <number, required threshold for the p-value of the
            partial correlation>

            "verbose": <boolean, required to display detailed description
            on the terminal>

   Value:

     Forest plot of partial correlations in Rplot.pdf

Citation
========

.. todo::

   Generate Zenodo DOI
     
GitHub
======

If you want to use the original ``GeneNetTools`` source code or
install the R package, visit the main author's `GitHub repository
<https://github.com/V-Bernal/GeneNetTools>`_.

References
==========

.. bibliography::
   :filter: docname in docnames
